tiup-mirror: Extend and update (#7367)
pingcap/docs: tiup/tiup-mirror.md

# Create a Private Mirror

> When creating a private cloud, usually, you need to use an isolated network environment, where the official mirror of TiUP is not accessible. Therefore, you can create a private mirror, which is mainly implemented by the `mirror` command. You can also use the `mirror` command for offline deployment. A private mirror also allows you to use components that you build and package yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a private cloud, usually, you need to use an isolated network environment, where the official mirror of TiUP is not accessible. Therefore, you can create a private mirror, which is mainly implemented by the `mirror` command. You can also use the `mirror` command for offline deployment. A private mirror also allows you to use components that you build and to package yourself.
```

Reviewer 2: @TomShawn Maybe both "build" and "package" are used to describe "components", not a infinitive phrase of "allow".

> The 'mirror' command is used to manage a component repository for TiUP, you can use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `mirror` command is used to manage a component repository for TiUP, you can use
```

it to create a private repository, or to add new component to an existing repository.
The repository can be used either online or offline.
It also provides some useful utilities to help manage keys, users, and versions
of components or the repository itself.

Usage:
  tiup mirror <command> [flags]

Available Commands:
  init        Initialize an empty repository
  sign        Add signatures to a manifest file
  genkey      Generate a new key pair
  clone       Clone a local mirror from a remote mirror and download all selected components
  merge       Merge two or more offline mirrors
  publish     Publish a component
  show        Show the mirror address
  set         Set mirror address
  modify      Modify published component
  renew       Renew the manifest of a published component.
  grant       grant a new owner
  rotate      Rotate root.json

Global Flags:
      --help                 Help for this command
      --skip-version-check   Skip the strict version check, by default a version must be a valid SemVer string

Use "tiup mirror [command] --help" for more information about a command.
```

## Clone a mirror

> The `tiup mirror clone` command is used to build a local mirror. The basic usage is as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can run the `tiup mirror clone` command to build a local mirror:
```

The repository can be used either online or offline.
It also provides some useful utilities to help managing keys, users and versions
of components or the repository itself.

Usage:
  tiup mirror <command> [flags]

Available Commands:
  init        Initialize an empty repository
  sign        Add signatures to a manifest file
  genkey      Generate a new key pair
  clone       Clone a local mirror from remote mirror and download all selected components

>   merge       Merge two or more offline mirror

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  merge       Merge two or more offline mirrors
```

  publish     Publish a component

>   show        Show mirror address

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  show        Show current mirror address
```

Author: ```suggestion
  show        Show the mirror address
```

  set         Set mirror address
  modify      Modify published component
  renew       Renew the manifest of a published component.

>   grant       grant a new owner

Author: This is literal output of a command, so to change this the command needs to be changed first.

  rotate      Rotate root.json

Global Flags:
      --help                 Help for this command

>       --skip-version-check   Skip the strict version check, by default a version must be a valid SemVer string

Author: This is literal output of a command, so to change this the command needs to be changed first.

>     - Execute the `tiup mirror clone <target-dir> --tidb v5.3.0 --tikv all` command to clone the v5.3.0 version of the TiDB component and all versions of the TiKV component.
>     - Execute the `tiup mirror clone <target-dir> v5.3.0` command to clone the v5.3.0 version of all components in a cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Run the `tiup mirror clone <target-dir> --tidb v5.3.0 --tikv all` command to clone the v5.3.0 version of the TiDB component and all versions of the TiKV component.
    - Run the `tiup mirror clone <target-dir> v5.3.0` command to clone the v5.3.0 version of all components in a cluster.
```

After cloning, signing keys are set up automatically.

### Manage the private repository

You can share the repository cloned using `tiup mirror clone` among hosts either by sharing files via SCP, NFS, or by making the repository available over the HTTP or HTTPS protocol. Use `tiup mirror set <location>` to specify the location of the repository.

```bash
tiup mirror set /shared_data/tiup
```

```bash
tiup mirror set https://tiup-mirror.example.com/
```

> **Note:**
>

> > On the machine on which you use `tiup mirror clone` setting the mirror will also change the mirror you are cloning from, so you need to reset this by running `tiup mirror set --reset` before updating the private mirror.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> If you use `tiup mirror set...` on the machine where you use `tiup mirror clone`, the next time you use `tiup mirror clone...`, the machine clones from the local mirror, not the remote one. Therefore, you need to reset the mirror by running `tiup mirror set --reset` before updating the private mirror.
```

> > If you use `tiup mirror set...` on the machine where you use `tiup mirror clone`, the next time you use `tiup mirror clone...`, the machine clones from the local mirror, not the remote one. Therefore, you need to reset the mirror by running `tiup mirror set --reset` before updating the private mirror.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> If you run `tiup mirror set...` on the machine where you run `tiup mirror clone`, the next time you run `tiup mirror clone...`, the machine clones from the local mirror, not the remote one. Therefore, you need to reset the mirror by running `tiup mirror set --reset` before updating the private mirror.
```

Another way of using a mirror is to use the `TIUP_MIRRORS` environment variable. Here is an example for running `tiup list` with a private repository.

```bash
export TIUP_MIRRORS=/shared_data/tiup
tiup list
```

> Using `TIUP_MIRRORS` can permanently change the mirror configuration, just like `tiup mirror set`. For details see [tiup issue #651](https://github.com/pingcap/tiup/issues/651).

Author: `TIUP_MIRRORS` are not commands, this is an environment variable.

### Updating a private repo

When running `tiup mirror clone` a second time with the same `target-dir` it will create new manifests and download newly available versions of components if applicable. It will skip downloading existing component versions.

> **Note:**
> 

> > As the manifest will be re-created make sure to include all components an all versions (including older ones that were previously downloaded) as otherwise they will be excluded from the manifest.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> As the manifest will be re-created make sure to include all components and all versions (including older ones that were previously downloaded) as otherwise they will be excluded from the manifest.
```

> > As the manifest will be re-created make sure to include all components and all versions (including older ones that were previously downloaded) as otherwise they will be excluded from the manifest.

Author: The manifest is recreated by the tool, not by the user. I think my version is slightly clearer here.

## Custom repository

> You can create a custom repository to work with TiDB components like TiDB, TiKV, or PD that you build yourself. It is also possible to create your own tiup components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create a custom repository to work with TiDB components like TiDB, TiKV, or PD that you build by yourself. It is also possible to create your own tiup components.
```

Creating your own components can be done with the `tiup package` command. The instructions for how to do this can be found [here](https://github.com/pingcap/tiup/blob/master/doc/user/package.md).

### Creating a custom repository

To create an empty repository in `/data/mirror`:

```bash
tiup mirror init /data/mirror
```

As part of creating the repository keys will be written to `/data/mirror/keys`.

To create a new private key in `~/.tiup/keys/private.json`:

```bash
tiup mirror genkey
```

Grant `jdoe` with private key `~/.tiup/keys/private.json` ownership of `/data/mirror`

```bash
tiup mirror set /data/mirror
tiup mirror grant jdoe
```

### Working with custom components

> First we create a custom component called hello.
> 
> ```bash
> $ cat > hello.c << END
> > #include <stdio.h>
> int main() {
>   printf("hello\n");
>   return (0);
> }
> END
> $ gcc hello.c -o hello
> $ tiup package hello --entry hello --name hello --release v0.0.1
> ```
> 
> This creates `package/hello-v0.0.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a custom component called hello.

    ```bash
    $ cat > hello.c << END
    > #include <stdio.h>
    int main() {
      printf("hello\n");
      return (0);
    }
    END
    $ gcc hello.c -o hello
    $ tiup package hello --entry hello --name hello --release v0.0.1
    ```

    `package/hello-v0.0.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz` is created.
```

> Then we create a new repository, a private key and then grant ownership to the repository.
> 
> ```bash
> $ tiup mirror init /tmp/m
> $ tiup mirror genkey
> $ tiup mirror set /tmp/m
> $ tiup mirror grant $USER
> ```
> 
> ```bash
> tiup mirror publish hello v0.0.1 package/hello-v0.0.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz hello
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Create a new repository and a private key, and grant ownership to the repository.

    ```bash
    $ tiup mirror init /tmp/m
    $ tiup mirror genkey
    $ tiup mirror set /tmp/m
    $ tiup mirror grant $USER
    ```

    ```bash
    tiup mirror publish hello v0.0.1 package/hello-v0.0.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz hello
    ```
```

> 2. Create a new repository and a private key, and grant ownership to the repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Create a repository and a private key, and grant ownership to the repository.
```

> And finally we run the component, if it wasn't installed yet it will be downloaded.
> 
> ```bash
> $ tiup hello
> ```
> 
> ```
> The component `hello` version  is not installed; downloading from repository.
> Starting component `hello`: /home/dvaneeden/.tiup/components/hello/v0.0.1/hello
> hello
> ```
> 
> With `tiup mirror merge` you can merge a repository with custom components into another one. This assumes that all components in `/data/my_custom_components` are signed by the current `$USER`.
> 
> ```bash
> $ tiup mirror set /data/my_mirror
> $ tiup mirror grant $USER
> $ tiup mirror merge /data/my_custom_components
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Run the component. If it is not installed yet, it will be downloaded first.

    ```bash
    $ tiup hello
    ```
    
    ```
    The component `hello` version  is not installed; downloading from repository.
    Starting component `hello`: /home/dvaneeden/.tiup/components/hello/v0.0.1/hello
    hello
    ```
    
    With `tiup mirror merge`, you can merge a repository with custom components into another one. This assumes that all components in `/data/my_custom_components` are signed by the current `$USER`.
    
    ```bash
    $ tiup mirror set /data/my_mirror
    $ tiup mirror grant $USER
    $ tiup mirror merge /data/my_custom_components
    ```
```
